---
layout: page
title: Wave modelling
parent: Other models
permalink: /wave_modelling/
nav_order: 1
---

## Wave modelling
There are various types of wave models, which may basically be divided into phase-resolving and phase-averaging models. In phase-resolving models (e.g. REF-DIF, FUNWAVE, refs) the individual waves on the sea surface are resolved, i.e. the surface is covered with a grid which is fine compared with the wave length (which may be from O(1) to O(100) metres). Phase-resolving models can be used only for regions of limited size because the computational grid has to be fine enough to resolve all relevant wavelengths. The actual limitation depends on the type of model used. There are time-dependent models and stationary models (in which the wave motion is purely periodic).

The most widely used time-dependent models are based on the Boussinesq equation, which is derived by integration over depth of the original 3-dimensional wave equation. The integration over depth limits the Boussinesq equation to be applicable in relatively shallow water, i.e. the depth must not be large compared with the wave length (although this requirement has been relaxed in recent work).

In phase-averaged models, only the statistics of the sea surface is computed, i.e. on points of a grid the action or energy spectra are computed. These types of models may be used from global to regional as well as local scales and are often called spectral wave models. Examples of the state-of-the-art, so-called 3rd-generation (3G), spectral wave models include WAM (such as ECWAM used at ECMWF) and WAVEWATCH III® (WW3, [https://polar.ncep.noaa.gov/waves/wavewatch/](https://polar.ncep.noaa.gov/waves/wavewatch/)), now the standard model adopted by the UK Met Office and Copernicus.

The SWAN model (Booij et al., 1999) started a new era for the application of spectral wave modelling in the coastal zone. The SWAN model can be applied in stationary mode (no variation in time, assuming a steady state), in restricted coastal areas, but can also be run in non-stationary (time-stepping) mode.  SWAN is an open source code that can easily be implemented ([http://www.swan.tudelft.nl/](http://www.swan.tudelft.nl/)) and is the most widely-used spectral wave model code, by both the scientific and engineering community. SWAN is a 3G wave model using the same formulations for the source terms as WAM and WW3, plus some additional formulations primarily for shallow water. The numerical solution techniques are quite different - SWAN uses a semi-implicit method which allows longer time steps. SWAN can model many of the processes affecting wind-waves known today: wave generation by wind, wave propagation, current and depth refraction, frequency shifting due to currents and non-stationary water depth, wave dissipation by whitecapping, bottom friction, vegetation and depth-induced breaking, nonlinear interactions (both 4- and 3-wave interactions), wave induced setup, transmission and reflection by obstacles and diffraction. For many of the processes the user can choose between different formulations (e.g. the different combinations for wind input and white-capping/deep water dissipation terms). SWAN has been included in the FVCOM model suite, as SWAVE (Qi et al., 2009) but a new implementation of the coupling using the unstructured-grid SWAN model, unSWAN, has been carried out by Zheng et al. (2017), using the vortex force formalism, which has some improved features. The state of the art in coastal wave modelling is reviewed in Cavaleri et al. (2018).

Coupled FVCOM-SWAN (v.4.4.1) model start produce operational high-resolution waves parameters forecasts over the western coast of Scotland (WeStCOMS v2 domain) since December  2021 at SAMS, which is available from [https://thredds.sams.ac.uk/](https://thredds.sams.ac.uk/).

